Arbor cable cell exporter and backend support in BluePyOpt (#1959)
arbor-sim/arbor: doc/tutorial/single_cell_bluepyopt.rst

The layer-5 pyramidal cell model is specified with the `morphology <https://github.com/BlueBrain/BluePyOpt/tree/master/examples/l5pc/morphology>`_  in ASC-format, the `mechanisms <https://github.com/BlueBrain/BluePyOpt/tree/master/examples/l5pc/mechanisms>`_, which match Arbor's Blue Brain Project catalogue, and their mapping to morphological regions in `mechanisms.json <https://github.com/BlueBrain/BluePyOpt/blob/master/examples/l5pc/config/mechanisms.json>`_ as well as mechanism parameters in `parameters.json <https://github.com/BlueBrain/BluePyOpt/blob/master/examples/l5pc/config/parameters.json>`_. The model exclusively uses density mechanisms, however, models with point-processes can also be exported to the JSON/ACC format presented in the following.

Export to JSON/ACC
------------------

> Before we can export a model, we first have to create it inside BluePyOpt. This can be achieved from the `l5pc directory <https://github.com/BlueBrain/BluePyOpt/blob/master/examples/l5pc>`_ by running

Author: The latter is the case here - models are created from scratch in BluePyOpt, then optimized with a particular simulator backend (Arbor or Neuron) and then exported to JSON/ACC or HOC (or potentially other formats).

Load from JSON/ACC
------------------

The exported model is summarized by a JSON file in the output directory, that references a morphology file (for the layer-5 pyramical cell in ASC, for the simple-cell in SWC), a label dictionary and decor (both in ACC) with relative paths. For the simple-cell example, this amounts to

.. literalinclude:: ../../python/example/single_cell_bluepyopt/simplecell/simple_cell.json
   :language: json
   :dedent:

In case of axon replacement, also the axon-replacement morphology and optionally the morphology after replacing the axon in the original are exported, as in the layer-5 pyramidal cell example.

> .. literalinclude:: ../../python/example/single_cell_bluepyopt/l5pc/l5pc.json

Author: I've tried to add more references to the included JSON format, which should make it clear. Indeed, when used in natural language the terms can be confusing. Let me know if the current situation is satisfactory. Otherwise, we can improve it again.

> .. literalinclude:: ../../python/example/single_cell_bluepyopt/l5pc/l5pc.json

Reviewer: That's better, thanks! On tiny remaining comment: move the 'also' after the comma further up ('are _also_ exported in the ACC format'). It's not incorrect, but it is a very long clause that you've stuck in the middle ;)

> .. literalinclude:: ../../python/example/single_cell_bluepyopt/l5pc/l5pc.json

Author: Done in 613c1c0.

To perform axon replacement, we first have to find the (unique) root segment of this region in the morphology. We can then split the segment tree at the axon root into two separate segment trees - a pruned one and one for the original axon.

.. code-block:: python

   # get unique axon root (tag for axon is 2)
   axon_root = morpho.segment_tree.tag_roots(2)[0]

   # prune morphology at axon root
   pruned_st, axon_st = morpho.segment_tree.split_at(axon_root)

Then we can determine the parent of the axon root to join the replacement onto, which we load from ACC. Alternatively, the user can build/supply a custom replacement here.

.. code-block:: python

   # parent segment to join onto
   axon_parent = morpho.segment_tree.parents[axon_root]

   # load replacement morphology
   axon_replacement = arbor.load_component(
      cell_json['morphology']['replace_axon']).component
   axon_replacement_st = replacement.to_segment_tree()

   # pruned segment tree with axon replacement
   joined_st = pruned_st.join_at(
      axon_parent, axon_replacement_st)

   # final morphology
   morpho_axon_replaced = arbor.morphology(joined_st)

> The steps presented here are included when loading an exported model with the above ``read_acc`` function from BluePyOpt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The steps presented here are performed automatically when loading an exported model with the above ``read_acc`` function from BluePyOpt.
```
I assume?

Define locations in the GUI
---------------------------

BluePyOpt makes use of the Neuron simulator's features to define custom locations for stimuli and voltage probes that can be challenging to translate to Arbor. As an example, the layer-5 pyramidal cell optimization problem has multiple voltage probes located distally on the apical dendrite at a fixed distance from the soma as described in `config/protocols.json <https://github.com/BlueBrain/BluePyOpt/blob/master/examples/l5pc/config/protocols.json>`_.

To describe these locations accurately in Arbor, we will use the Arbor GUI. For this purpose, we create an :class:`arbor.cable_cell` and export it to ACC so that it can be loaded in the GUI,

.. code-block:: python

   cell = arbor.cable_cell(morpho, labels, decor)

>    arbor.write_component(cell, 'path/to/l5pc_cable_cell.acc')

Reviewer: Bit surprising that `cable_cell`, `label_dict` and `decor` are `component`s, but `morphology` isn't.

Reviewer: Morph not being one is made into a specific point a bit up (`load_asc`). It's logical when you know what's happening, but not if you don't :)

After loading this in file in the GUI with ``File > Cable cell > Load``, we can click the ``Locations`` and ``Cell`` tab to obtain the following overview.

.. figure:: single_cell_bluepyopt_gui_l5pc_overview.png
    :width: 800

>     :align: center

Reviewer: A short caption on this figure and the others would be great. In subsequent figures, usually something specific is meant to be shown; it would be good to restate this in the caption.

> As a first attempt to formulate the location at 660 µm from the soma, we can use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``config/protocols.json``'s first location (see under ``"extra_recordings"``) is a point at 660 µm from the soma. A first attempt to formulate this location, we can use
```

.. code-block::

>    (distal-translate (on-components 0.5 (region "soma")) 660)

Reviewer: Maybe it's a bit much to ask for each expression what is going on (even though that is probably helpful!). A mention of this being our location and region DSL, plus a link to `doc/concepts/labels.rst` at this first home-cooked expression would be helpful.

and since we're only interested in the apical dendrite, we can wrap this in ``(restrict ... (region "apic"))``.

> Unfortunately, for this particular morphology, this does not result in a concrete location as can be seen in the Arbor GUI below (Locset A, violet, is empty). Alternatively, the method :func:`arbor.cable_cell.locations` will also return an empty list of concrete locations for this expression. To obtain a valid location instead, we can replace ``(on-components 0.5 (region "soma"))`` by the proximal boundary of the apical dendrite with ``(proximal (region "apic"))`` (Locset B, orange). The restrict operation to the apical region is no longer necessary. But now, the resulting concrete location is non-unique.

Reviewer: An explanation for why no concrete location is found is missing. Is there one?

Reviewer: And why is none-uniqueness an issue? Are locations in ``config/protocols.json`` supposed to be unique?

.. figure:: single_cell_bluepyopt_gui_l5pc_bAP_attempt.png
    :width: 800
    :align: center

> BluePyOpt solves this issue with the Neuron simulator by choosing a particular section on the apical dendrite. While a similar approach is possible in Arbor using the :func:`arbor.cable_cell.locations` method, for reproducibility it is preferable to determine the location directly in the Arbor GUI.

Reviewer: `BluePyOpt solves this issue with the Neuron simulator by choosing a particular section on the apical dendrite.`

This isn't clear. Do you mean that Neuron chooses one at random?

Author: The function [find_icomp](https://github.com/BlueBrain/BluePyOpt/blob/master/bluepyopt/ephys/locations.py#L284) just picks the last location with non-vanishing diameter at given distance from the soma after iterating over all of them. So Neuron decides on the order, BluePyOpt picks the last one. The advantage of the GUI procedure is that you have visual control over what probe location you select (and you're sure the S-expression really evaluates to what you believe it should).

Author: Also, I didn't check the voltages at all the locations shown in the second figure. But not all of them are 660 um away from the soma on the high apical branches, some are just terminals much lower on the apical dendrite. For the latter, I'd expect the traces to look differently.

Author: I'll emphasize the user-aspect more. There's an [explicit check](https://github.com/lukasgd/BluePyOpt/blob/9443b123c72f35adfba747114406410b4ff3c160/bluepyopt/ephys/protocols.py#L604-L610) in the Arbor protocol that enforces a unique recording (probe) location, which is by design what BluePyOpt expects. If the user decides in the GUI which location to choose, I wouldn't call that picking at random, although, of course the user is free to do that.

With Neuron, the implementation in BluePyOpt just chooses the last section with non-vanishing diameter at that fixed distance from the soma, which depends on Neuron's internal section ordering that is probably not random but neither something guaranteed to be fixed at the API-level.

> For this purpose, we can use the identify a distal apical branch (or segment) by hovering with the mouse over the morphology and keeping a focus on the data in the left lower corner. We can then define a region with 

Reviewer: `we can use the identify a distal apical branch (or segment)`

Some words are missing here.

.. literalinclude:: ../../python/example/single_cell_bluepyopt_l5pc.py
   :language: python
   :dedent:
   :lines: 12,24-26

The cable cell and protocols
----------------------------

Following BluePyOpt's layer-5 pyramidal cell example, we have to define protocols with stimuli and probes as well as make the appropriate mechanism catalogues available to the recipe.

To replicate the ``bAP`` protocol in BluePyOpt, we add a short stimulus centrally at the soma to the decor.

.. literalinclude:: ../../python/example/single_cell_bluepyopt_l5pc.py
   :language: python
   :dedent:
   :lines: 28,30-42

The decor allows to further customize the discretization for a subsequent simulation using :func:`arbor.decor.discretization` as examined in the :ref:`tutorial for a detailed single cell model <tutorialsinglecellswc>`. For brevity, we will use the default here except on the soma. As a next step, we create an :class:`arbor.cable_cell` using the morphology, label dictionary and decor.

Then, we can install a voltage probe on the apical dendrite.

.. literalinclude:: ../../python/example/single_cell_bluepyopt_l5pc.py
   :language: python
   :dedent:
   :lines: 44-46

> To prepare the cable cell for simulation, we can either construct an instance of the :class:`arbor.single_cell_model` from the cable cell (shown in the simple-cell example) or - for more complicated use cases - define our own recipe. We will follow the latter for the layer-5 pyramidal cell. 

Reviewer: In this example I don't see a reason for creating your own `recipe`. Am I missing it?

Author: The recipe is simply there as a starting point for more customization. The L5PC tutorial would also work with just a `single_cell_model`, but then there's no added value over what's in the simple-cell tutorial.
